“What am I looking at?” You might ask yourself.
Or you might be familiar with this infamous sight: named the Hubble Extreme Deep Field. Produced in 2012 as a result of twenty-two days of exposure time, the image combines thousands of individual measurements into one.
This is the deepest visible light image ever made of the universe. In fact, you are looking back in time and, literally, staring at billions of years of cosmic history: a two-dimensional tapestry of previously untold stories; and of otherwise ephemeral narratives immortalised here in pixels.
Indeed, most of these objects will no longer exist as they appear. Many will have burned out, their matter decaying over millions of years, subsequently becoming devoid of all visible structure.
Due to our cosmic insignificance (in light of the bigger picture), we are rarely left to consciously deal with such inconveniences in prosaic day-to-day experiences: we are able to interact with one another in real time; albeit information is physical, so governed by the physical laws of the universe.
The transmission of information is strictly at the mercy of its mediation, and although this is often imperceptible in the post-digital world, we may experience these limitations first-hand in the form of latency—just by browsing the internet and having to wait for the content to load.
Another way to conceptualise this is to stand outside and gaze outward into the sky: it takes just over a second for moonlight to hit our eyes, meaning that we could establish communications with someone there rather effortlessly; but over eight minutes for sunlight to reach us, meaning that for each round of call-and-response we need at least sixteen minutes, and if we were to witness an elaborate solar event it would have actually happened some time ago.
Thanks to modern imaging technologies we have access to many worlds beyond our senses (e.g. using infrared to see past optical wavelengths). However, this implies something metaphysically profound: an image, such as above, is a translation of data for our sensory spectrum rather than something purely phenomenal; and thus, a mere approximation based on our knowledge and understanding of the material world. In this case, a representation of the Fornax constellation, captured by the Hubble apparatus and interpreted by an array of instrumentation (ranging from computer software to intuition, knowledge and memory; and whatever plays a part in constructing reality).